Create a repository mapping with descriptions for the project (#1007)
napari/docs: docs/developers/repositories.md

  We welcome contributors to these repositories to help drive forward new features and improvements.
  Contributions to these repositories are likely to be more visible, but 
  may also require more coordination with the core team and other contributors.
- **Maintenance**: stable and useful; bug fixes, documentation updates, and
  dependency work are usually the most common changes.
  Contributions within this scope will be attended to in a timely manner, while
  larger feature contributions may require more discussion and coordination to
  ensure they fit with the current direction and scope of the project.
- **Early Development**: new or still changing quickly. Contributions are especially
  welcome and can help shape the direction of these projects. These repositories
  may be fast changing, but can be easier to contribute to since they have 
  fewer established conventions and patterns.
- **Backlog**: still relevant, but not a current priority for the core team.
  We encourage contributions to these repos to bring them up to speed and 
  bring functionality to match the original vision for the project.

> ## Core application and extensions

Author: ```suggestion
## Core application and core plugins
```

> These are the repositories that are most central to the central napari experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These are the repositories that are most central to the core napari experience.
```

See [](upstream-dependencies) for libraries that are fundamental to napari functionality
but are developed outside of the napari organization.

| Repo | Description | Status |
| --- | --- | --- |
| [napari](https://github.com/napari/napari) | Main viewer application and the central repo for layers, events, settings, rendering integration, and releases. | **Active** |
| [napari-console](https://github.com/napari/napari-console) | In-viewer Python console plugin. | Maintenance |
| [napari-svg](https://github.com/napari/napari-svg) | SVG export plugin for napari layers. | Backlog |

> | [napari-metadata](https://github.com/napari/napari-metadata) | Metadata editing plugin for layers; included with bundled installs and `napari[optional]`. | Active |

Reviewer 2: Do we ever talk about `optional` in the docs? I think we shouold rather say `napari[all]`.

Author: we do, a tiny bit, but not as much in comparison to all.

> | [napari-metadata](https://github.com/napari/napari-metadata) | Metadata editing plugin for layers; included with bundled installs and `napari[optional]`. | Active |

Author: ```suggestion
| [napari-metadata](https://github.com/napari/napari-metadata) | Metadata editing plugin for layers; included with bundled installs and `napari[all]`. | Active |
```

> ## Documentation, websites, and communication

Author: Two tables, one for the "core" website
Another table for the additional doc pages

| [workshops](https://github.com/napari/workshops) | Current workshop materials and publishing infrastructure for napari workshops. | Active |
| [napari-sphinx-theme](https://github.com/napari/napari-sphinx-theme) | Shared Sphinx theme and site UI used across napari websites. | Active |
| [island-dispatch](https://github.com/napari/island-dispatch) | Blog for napari news, announcements, and community updates. | Active |
| [weather-report](https://github.com/napari/weather-report) | Public analytics dashboard for project and ecosystem metrics. | Maintenance |
| [resources](https://github.com/napari/resources) | Shared graphics, copy, and brand resources for the project. | Maintenance |
| [napari.github.io](https://github.com/napari/napari.github.io) | Website content and generated assets used to publish napari/docs on napari.org. | Maintenance |
| [meeting-notes](https://github.com/napari/meeting-notes) | Notes from recurring project meetings. | Active |

## Plugin System

The plugin ecosystem is built around the `npe2` plugin engine and manifest specification.
The repositories below are focused on supporting the plugin ecosystem,

> whether through core plugin infrastructure and development resources. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
whether through core plugin infrastructure or development resources. 
```

| [napari-plugin-checks](https://github.com/napari/napari-plugin-checks) | Checks and helper tooling for validating napari plugins. | Backlog |

## Specialized plugins

These repos are useful to contributors working on particular workflows or newer
features, but they are not as central as the core application and docs repos.

| Repo | Description | Status |
| --- | --- | --- |
| [napari-animation](https://github.com/napari/napari-animation) | Plugin for building and exporting animations from viewer state. | Active |
| [napari-geojson](https://github.com/napari/napari-geojson) | GeoJSON support for reading and writing geographic annotation data in napari. | Active |
| [napari-graph](https://github.com/napari/napari-graph) | Graph data structures and algorithms for visualization and editing workflows. | Backlog |
| [napari-tiff](https://github.com/napari/napari-tiff) | TIFF reader and writer plugin maintained by the napari team. | Active |
| [napari-xarray](https://github.com/napari/napari-xarray) | Integration work for xarray-based data and labeled nD arrays in napari. | Backlog |

> | [bermuda](https://github.com/napari/bermuda) | Performance-oriented spatial algorithms project, including compiled Rust components. | Maintenance |

Author: move to core section

## Release, packaging, and ecosystem tooling

These repos support packaging, automation, plugin infrastructure, and other
project-level operations.

| Repo | Description | Status |
| --- | --- | --- |
| [packaging](https://github.com/napari/packaging) | Build and packaging infrastructure for bundled installers and app distribution. | Maintenance |
| [napari-release-tools](https://github.com/napari/napari-release-tools) | Scripts and automation used to streamline the release process. | Active |
| [shared-workflows](https://github.com/napari/shared-workflows) | Reusable GitHub Actions workflows shared across napari repositories. | Active |
| [pins](https://github.com/napari/pins) | Version constraints and compatibility pins for the napari plugin ecosystem. | Backlog |
| [constructor-manager](https://github.com/napari/constructor-manager) | Tooling related to managing constructor-based app bundles. | Backlog |

(upstream-dependencies)=
## Important upstream dependencies

The repositories below are not in the `napari` GitHub organization, but they
are important friends of napari that are contributed to by members of the napari community.

> The following `pyapp-kit` projects were largely spun out of napari and

Author: ```suggestion
The following `pyapp-kit` projects originated in the napari org and
```

Reviewer: `vispy` below is not in the pyapp-kit suite so we need to tweak this sentence. Also want to double check app-model and psygnal both started in the napari org.

Reviewer 2: `app-model` was under napari for a time. Psygnal's evented containers and eventedmodels were a spin-out of the same code in napari, but psygnal itself never was in napari afaik.

- [napari-plugin-devtools](https://github.com/napari/napari-plugin-devtools): tooling repo for plugin developers.
- [napari-plugin-engine](https://github.com/napari/napari-plugin-engine): legacy plugin engine based on pluggy.
- [napari-scipy2025-workshop](https://github.com/napari/napari-scipy2025-workshop): workshop-specific repository for the SciPy 2025 napari tutorial materials.
- [napari-web-experimental](https://github.com/napari/napari-web-experimental): archived exploration of a possible web front end.
- [napari-workshop-template](https://github.com/napari/napari-workshop-template): template for creating napari workshop websites and materials.
- [old-docs](https://github.com/napari/old-docs): documentation repository from an older docs system.
- [plugin-cookiecutter](https://github.com/napari/plugin-cookiecutter): early plugin cookiecutter repository.
- [product-heuristics-2020](https://github.com/napari/product-heuristics-2020): product-heuristics snapshot from 2020.
- [superqt](https://github.com/napari/superqt): mirror of the upstream `pyapp-kit/superqt` project.

> - [surveys](https://github.com/napari/surveys): Analysis workflows for napari survey data.

Author: I DM'd Melissa to determine if she has a local working draft going for this repo, before we archive

Reviewer 3: argh sorry I didn't realize this is what you were asking and only now I am reviewing this PR! Yes I do have a local copy, are we archiving just because you have too many things under napari? If so I can keep it under my account just so the analysis is still there (currently on a PR).
